Salmonella Outbreak Investigation with Whole-Genome Sequencing Data

The bacterial pathogen Salmonella enterica is not just a human pathogen but is capable of causing disease in other species. The incidence of Salmonella has been extensively studied in animals and environmental sites. There is a wide array of environmental niches in which Salmonella can survive. Salmonella may be disseminated in various water sources such as effluent discharges, agricultural runoff, excretions by wild animals, and fresh water. Water contaminated with animal waste has the potential for proliferation and dissemination of Salmonella by wild animals.

Clinical surveillance and investigation of nosocomial outbreaks are primarily dependent on determining whether biogeographically related pairs of strains are clonal and originated from the same source or are distinct and would reflect independent transmission events. The gold standard laboratory method for bacterial relatedness has been pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE). In 2013, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) participated in an interagency collaboration to routinely use whole genome sequencing (WGS) techniques and analyze all clinical and food-related _Listeria monocytogenes_ isolates in the United States of America (U.S.) with the eventual goal to replace PFGE. In 2019, multiple United States government agencies and the CDC discontinued PFGE and moved to WGS as the primary characterization tool. This transition from PFGE to WGS also affected the USDA Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS) National Veterinary Service Laboratory (NVSL). The NVSL safeguards U.S. animal health and contribute to public health by ensuring wide variety of information and services, centered around diagnosis of domestic and foreign animal diseases, support of disease control and eradication programs, reagents for diagnostic testing, training, and laboratory certification. The NVSL provides diagnostic support for veterinarians, veterinary hospitals, and researchers in animal health and disease. Very little research has been published on veterinary hospitals using WGS in epidemiological studies and nosocomial outbreak studies.

A study of the Auburn University College of Veterinary Medicine (AUCVM) Veterinary Teaching Hospital was conducted to better understand the dynamics of _Salmonella_ in the environment and prevalence of _Salmonella_ within a multi-species animal facility. Veterinary teaching hospitals have many different species of animals in close proximity to one another. The environment can be a potential source and reservoir for the transmission of _Salmonella_ in a veterinary hospital. Persistence of _Salmonella_ in the environment has been implicated for the spread of _Salmonella_ among patients in many nosocomial outbreaks of salmonellosis. _Salmonella_ is the most commonly associated agent responsible for nosocomial outbreaks among veterinary teaching hospitals.

Additional studies after the three-year study was conducted to evaluate _Salmonella_ in the on-site dairy herd and among the environment of the Equine Reproduction Center. A total of 1395 samples were collected over the different surveillance projects. From those projects, ten samples were sent to the NVSL for WGS. The question would be are these isolates the same strain or derived from a common ancestor? This project’s aim is to develop a pipeline to process the raw WGS data from the NVSL. The purpose of the pipeline is to have a set of scripts and procedures that veterinary hospitals and veterinary teaching hospitals can utilize for epidemiological studies using WGS data.
