# 6. Conclusion

A study of the Auburn University College of Veterinary Medicine (AUCVM) Veterinary Teaching Hospital was conducted to better understand prevalence of _Salmonella_ in a multi-species animal facility ([Kitchens, 2016](https://etd.auburn.edu/bitstream/handle/10415/5456/Steven%20Kitchens%20Thesis.pdf?sequence=2&isAllowed=y)). Several additional studies after the primarily two-year study was conducted to evaluate Salmonella in the on-site dairy herd and among the environment of the Equine Reproduction Center. A total of 1395 samples were collected over the different surveillance projects. From those projects, ten _Salmonella_ Muenster isolates were selected for whole-genome sequencing by the United States Department of Agriculture National Veterinary Service Laboratory (USDA NVSL) in Ames, Iowa. The resulting fastq files from USDA NVSL were uploaded to [NCBI](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Traces/study/?acc=SRP201758&o=acc_s%3Aa).

These ten sequences were downloaded and FastQC reports generated to assess the quality of the sequences in [Step 1](https://github.com/AUBioInformatics22/Salmonella-Project/tree/main/1%20-%20Initial%20Quality%20Assessment%20of%20Raw%20NGS%20Data). The FastQC analysis showed that the read quality values were fine. The “Per base sequence quality” score average was maintained over 28 on all reads, so trimming was not performed on the sequences.

[Step 2](https://github.com/AUBioInformatics22/Salmonella-Project/tree/main/2%20-%20Alignment%20of%20Sequence%20Reads%20to%20Referenc%20Genome_) trimmed and un-trimmed sequences were aligned to a reference _Salmonella_ Muenster. Average percent mapped in the untrimmed data is 95.13% while the average percent mapped in the trimmed data was 89.23%, thus trimming reduced the average percent mapped. Trimming was not considered necessary and there was a concern that high quality reads would also be trimmed, thus reducing the percentage of quality reads.

[Step 3](https://github.com/AUBioInformatics22/Salmonella-Project/tree/main/3%20-%20Post-alignment%20processing)

[Step 4](https://github.com/AUBioInformatics22/Salmonella-Project/tree/main/4%20-%20Variant%20Discovery)

Due to the difficulty and issues with completing Step 4 and the student peer-review feedback in the hopes of a phylogenetic tree, an alternative approach was taken to generate the phylogenetic trees. There are many reports in literature of utilizing an approach of assembly (SPAdes), annotation (Prokka), and pan genome analysis (Roary)([Gunn et al, 2016](https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fmicb.2016.01664/full); [Munck et al, 2020](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41597-020-0417-7)) to generate phylogenetic trees and detect outbreak clusters of bacterial pathogens. [Step 5](https://github.com/AUBioInformatics22/Salmonella-Project/tree/main/5%20-%20Data%20Analysis%20for%20Peer%20Review) focused on this approach as well as using two additional tools for bacterial phylogenetics (MINTyper and CSI Phylogeny). The phylogenetic trees generated by Roary and CSI Phylogeny grouped isolates into very similar branches. The resulting MINTyper tree had small differences from the other trees. This may be explained by Roary and CSI Phylogeny both utilizing a maximum-likelihood algorithm versuse the neighbor-joining algorithm used by MINTyper used for phylogeny. CSI Phylogeny also generated a SNP matrix with a minimum of 6 SNPs and maximum of 43 SNPs between any two isolates. Previous reports have examined SNP thresholds to consider whether isolate are considered the same strain over time ([Octavia 2016](https://journals.asm.org/doi/full/10.1128/JCM.03235-14)). The authors concluded 4 SNPs over a four-week time period and 9 SNPs over a 120 day time period as a cutoff for an outbreak cluster. Isolates SRR10740743(2016) and SRR10740745(2015) had the most number of SNPs compared to the other isolates, but only had 8 SNPs between themselves. These isolates are within an acceptable range of 4 SNPs/4 weeks or 9 SNPs/120 days if extrapolated up to one year. These isolate would be considered different strains/outbreak clusters from 
other isolates from around that time period (=/<1 year) with a range of SNPs between 29 and 43. SRR10740743 and SRR10740745 would be included in the same outbreak cluster with SRR10740739 (2012) with 31 and 25 SNPs respectively over a 4 or 3 year time period. This suggests that new strains emerged over time and continued to circulated in the environment of the AUCVM Large Animal Hospital. It appears that the AUCVM Large Animal Hospital was initially contaminated with a single strain, but multiple strains emerged as the persistent _Salmonella_ Muenster continued to thrive and circulate in the environment.

These finding suggest that these isolates are derived from a common ancestor, but progressed into multiple strains. Even with multiple strains circulating, one would still consider this an outbreak cluster, since this environmental contamination derived from one strain. These results are limited by sequencing of only 10 isolates from hundreds of isolates. Future directions of sequencing additional isolates could result in discovery of new strains that emerged or determination if strains ceased circulating in the environment.

This research was funded by the Animal Health and Disease Research Program of the College of Veterinary Medicine, the Alabama Agricultural Experiment Station, and the USDA Agriculture Research Service. </br>

## Contributions
Steven Kitchens </br>
Andrea Pietruska: step 3 and 4
